docs(www): use static query blog post (#11811)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2019-02-20-introducing-use-static-query/index.md

---
title: Introducing useStaticQuery
date: 2019-02-20
author: Sidhartha Chatterjee
tags:
  - hooks
  - static query
---

React Hooks are _cool_. Besides simplifying your code and removing the need for a lot of boilerplate associated with classes in JavaScript (looking at you, `this`), they enable some serious shareability. They also make it possible to use state in functional components.

You can probably tell that we've been super excited about [React Hooks][hooks-intro]. So when they finally landed in React 16.8, we figured it was time to give our very own `StaticQuery` component the hook treatment!

### Say hello to useStaticQuery

`useStaticQuery` is a hook that takes a GraphQL query and returns your data. That's it.

**No more Render Props necessary to use a Static Query**

This simplifies accessing data in your components and also keeps your component tree shallow.

> Let's quickly check out a simple example. Here's a simple Header component, first using `StaticQuery` and then with `useStaticQuery`.

Reviewer: Nit, but it's nice to not use "simple"

```suggestion
Let's quickly check out an example. Here's a sample Header component, first using `StaticQuery` and then with `useStaticQuery`. Comparing in this way makes the benefits of `useStaticQuery` extremely evident.
```

> Let's quickly check out a simple example. Here's a simple Header component, first using `StaticQuery` and then with `useStaticQuery`.

Reviewer 2: If possible, it would be good to change usage of the word "simple" to something less assuming. How about "check out an example", and  "Here's a basic Header component"?

Author: This is a great point! 

> Let's quickly check out a basic example. Here's a typical Header component,

What do you think of this?

Reviewer 2: That works! :shipit:

        site {
          siteMetadata {
            title
          }
        }
      }
    `
  )
  return site.siteMetadata
}
```

Now everytime you need the site title, you can use this custom hook. And in case you change the structure of that data, you only need to change the query once!

![excited-gif](./images/excited.gif)

We're really excited about this pattern and everything it enables. With our upcoming [themes][themes] feature, a theme could export custom hooks of its own and consumers could access data without writing a single query.

# Where can I get this?

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">useStaticQuery hook snuck into <a href="https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@gatsbyjs</a> pretty quick 😍 <a href="https://t.co/PbzTuzk6hb">https://t.co/PbzTuzk6hb</a> waaay nicer API than using the &lt;StaticQuery&gt; component. <a href="https://t.co/6Mf4sSF5C3">pic.twitter.com/6Mf4sSF5C3</a></p>&mdash; Jacob Impson (@jacobimpson) <a href="https://twitter.com/jacobimpson/status/1095930703504584706?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">February 14, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

> The sharp reader (Jacob is sharp, be like Jacob) would've noticed that we _stealthily_ released `useStaticQuery` last week.

Author: I was actually breaking the fourth wall by acknowledging the current reader of this post. Unless it's super weird and not obvious, let's keep it? 😛 

Replaced sharp with astute for that dramatic old school narrative style ✍️

> The sharp reader (Jacob is sharp, be like Jacob) would've noticed that we _stealthily_ released `useStaticQuery` last week.

Author: @marcysutton Thoughts on this?

You can probably tell that we've been super excited about [React Hooks][hooks-intro]. So when they finally landed in React 16.8, we figured it was time to give our very own `StaticQuery` component the hook treatment!

### Say hello to useStaticQuery

`useStaticQuery` is a hook that takes a GraphQL query and returns your data. That's it.

**No more Render Props necessary to use a Static Query**

This simplifies accessing data in your components and also keeps your component tree shallow.

Let's quickly check out a simple example. Here's a simple Header component, first using `StaticQuery` and then with `useStaticQuery`.

### Before

```jsx
import React from "react"
import { StaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"

const Header = () => {
  return (
    <StaticQuery
      query={graphql`
        query {
          site {
            siteMetadata {
              title
            }
          }
        }
      `}
      render={data => (
        <header>
          <h1>{data.site.siteMetadata.title}</h1>
        </header>
      )}
    />
  )
}

export default Header
```

### After

```jsx
import React from "react"
import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"

const Header = () => {

>   const { site } = useStaticQuery(

Reviewer 2: Would it be overkill to highlight the changes in these examples? Like lines 33, 42 and 44 in the "before" example, and 61, 73 and 75 in the after example (at least in the version I'm looking at).

Author: Definitely not overkill and I see the value in this! Done.

    graphql`
      query {
        site {
          siteMetadata {
            title
          }
        }
      }
    `
  )

  return (
    <header>
      <h1>{site.siteMetadata.title}</h1>
    </header>
  )
}

export default Header
```

Isn't that cleaner and more succinct?

Just like `StaticQuery`, when you build your site for production, Gatsby will parse _and_ execute your queries in `useStaticQuery` and inject data in just the right place.

Where this gets even more powerful is the ability to create custom hooks that use `useStaticQuery` in them. Let's say you need to query for the site title several times in your app. Instead of a call to `useStaticQuery` in each component, you can extract it out to a custom hook like:

```jsx
const useSiteMetadata = () => {
  const { site } = useStaticQuery(
    graphql`
      query {
        site {
          siteMetadata {
            title
          }
        }
      }
    `
  )
  return site.siteMetadata
}
```

> Now everytime you need the site title, you can use this custom hook. And in case you change the structure of that data, you only need to change the query once!

Reviewer 2: Can you also show an example of this being consumed? I think that would help!

Author: Great catch! Done.

![excited-gif](./images/excited.gif)

> We're really excited about this pattern and everything it enables. With our upcoming [themes][themes] feature, a theme could export custom hooks of its own and consumers could access data without writing a single query.

Reviewer 2: Is this `themes` link accurate?

Author: It links to the blog post by @jlengstorf at /blog/2019-02-11-gatsby-themes-livestream-and-example/ 

Not sure what our canonical go to themes link should be at the moment. Suggestions?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I just wanted to make sure it wasn't a broken link! Looks like we haven't really documented themes yet...so the blog post makes sense for now.

`useStaticQuery` is a hook that takes a GraphQL query and returns your data. That's it.

**No more Render Props necessary to use a Static Query**

This simplifies accessing data in your components and also keeps your component tree shallow.

Let's quickly check out a basic example. Here's a typical Header component, first written using `StaticQuery` and then `useStaticQuery`.

### Before

```jsx
import React from "react"
import { StaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"

const Header = () => {
  return (
    // highlight-next-line
    <StaticQuery
      query={graphql`
        query {
          site {
            siteMetadata {
              title
            }
          }
        }
      `}
      // highlight-next-line
      render={data => (
        <header>
          <h1>{data.site.siteMetadata.title}</h1>
        </header>
      )}
    />
  )
}

export default Header
```

### After

```jsx
import React from "react"
import { useStaticQuery, graphql } from "gatsby"

const Header = () => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const { site } = useStaticQuery(
    graphql`
      query {
        site {
          siteMetadata {
            title
          }
        }
      }
    `
  )

  return (

>     // highlight-next-line

Reviewer 2: I think the `return (` statement needs to be highlighted here...? (I may have gotten a line number wrong)

Author: I highlighted the next line since the value of the return changes but not the return statement. Not sure though. Here is what it looks like. 
![screenshot 2019-02-21 05 09 27](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7701981/53132803-e7b0c900-3596-11e9-9ff5-9a31c2d98323.png)
![screenshot 2019-02-21 05 09 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7701981/53132805-e8e1f600-3596-11e9-8055-e22f3c3dc07e.png)

Reviewer 2: Oh yeah, you're totally right–I see it now! You can keep this as-is. :)

    <header>
      <h1>{site.siteMetadata.title}</h1>
    </header>
  )
}

export default Header
```

Isn't that cleaner and more succinct?

Just like `StaticQuery`, when you build your site for production, Gatsby will parse _and_ execute your queries in `useStaticQuery` and inject data in just the right place.

Where this gets even more powerful is the ability to create custom hooks that use `useStaticQuery` in them. Let's say you need to query for the site title several times in your app. Instead of a call to `useStaticQuery` in each component, you can extract it out to a custom hook like:

```jsx
const useSiteMetadata = () => {
  const { site } = useStaticQuery(
    graphql`
      query {
        site {
          siteMetadata {
            title
          }
        }
      }
    `
  )
  return site.siteMetadata
}
```

Now everytime you need the site title, you can use this custom hook.

```jsx
const Header = () => {
  // highlight-next-line

>   const { title } = useSiteMetadata()

Reviewer 2: 🆒 👍
